This will be a fairly long and involved code challenge, but I think you are going to enjoy it.
You will learn more about multi token words as targets to analyze, adapt and extend the code that I
introduced in the previous video.
Learn more about data visualizations, do some statistical validation in a separate data set, and lots
of other things.
So let's begin.
The goal of exercise one is to tokenize some text and find the locations of the final token in multi
token target words.
So if you look in the helper or the solutions files you will find lots of sentences like these, each
of which contains one of eight target words.
So there are four target words in each category.
One category is about dental hygiene and the other one is about furniture.
And the idea is that each of these sentences contains exactly one target word.
But that target word can be in a different location in each of the sentences.
Therefore, you're going to need to search through each of these sentences and find not only which target
is in that sentence, but also the index corresponding to the final token in that target word.
Now I'm going to give you some specific tips about how to do that in a moment.
But first let me tell you about setting things up.
So you're also going to need a variable for the number of sentences.
And you will also need a variable that here I call labels.
And this is just zeros for all of the dental hygiene category sentences and ones for all of these sentences
that have the target word coming from the furniture category.
You will use this for implementing the statistical comparisons of the activations for the two categories
in a later exercise.
Next, you can create a list of lists in which each element in the list is a smaller list that contains
the tokens for each of the target words.
So here we see all of the target words that we will be looking for split up into their component tokens.
And here is the list of lists of that target those target tokens.
Now we're going to use the GPT two model for this code challenge.
You do not need to import the model yet.
We import the model in a later exercise.
But you do need the GPT two tokenizer for this exercise.
And you can.
You also need to tokenize all of the sentences into a batch, including using padding because the sentences
have different numbers of tokens.
And here I'm just showing an example of the tokenization of the first sentence, including the token
indices and the attention mask.
I'm sure you remember from earlier in the course that in the GPT two tokenizer, the final token is
also the padding token, which corresponds to the end of sequence token.
And that's this one here it's 50,256.
Of course that corresponds to zeros in the attention mask.
Okay.
And then this screenshot shows code that I set up to identify the index of the final token for each
target word for each sentence.
This is really similar to the code that I showed in the Python demo in the previous video.
So you loop over all of the sentences, then you loop over all of the targets, because we need to search
for each target word in each sentence, because we don't know a priori which token or sorry, which
target is in the sentence, and also how long it is.
Then we loop over all the tokens in this sequence or this little sentence, and if it is a match, then
we store both the index of the token and also the token number.
So we can refer back to the token value.
And by this here token vowels I'm referring to calling toothpaste token zero toothbrush token one floss
we can call two mouthwash three, and so on.
So this is a way to identify the individual tokens targets and also their token indices.
Of course this is for the final token in the target word.
And then you can see here at the bottom.
I'm also printing out the target and its index for each sentence.
So that's just for some confirmations, like some sanity checking that the code here really works correctly.
I also counted the total number of appearances of each target word, and you should see that there are
five appearances of each individual target.
These are numbered zero through seven, as I explained a moment ago.
These are just arbitrary target labels, so we can refer back to them in later exercises.
Okay, so this is already quite a bit to do for exercise one.
But the most challenging parts of this exercise you can copy from the code demo in the previous video.
And now you can pause the video and get to work.
And when you're ready, or if you get stuck, then come back to the video and you can watch me show
my solution and discuss the tokenization.
Here are the libraries that I will use here.
Lots of matplotlib stuff here.
Okay.
Here I'm importing the GPT two tokenizer.
I'm not actually importing the model here.
I'm going to import it in a later exercise.
We're actually going to use GPT two large for this exercise for the activations.
So here all the sentences these were also generated by Claude with some interaction for me.
So yeah basically every sentence here has lots of words in it.
But also one, exactly one appearance of one of these four words that all appear in this category for
dental hygiene.
So these are all the dental hygiene sentences.
And then over here again, exactly one appearance per sentence of one of the target words which are
here.
And yeah, all of these are multi-token targets.
So it can run that code here.
And yeah, then defining the labels.
Basically, I'm just relying on the fact that I know that when I created these sentences, there is
exactly the same number of dental hygiene category sentences as there are furniture related sentences.
So I can just define some linearly spaced vector and then say where is that greater than 0.5.
So that's going to cut it exactly into half.
And that's how I created this set of labels here.
If you use a more sophisticated method then that's great.
That's probably more versatile and usable in broader situations.
For example, if these sentences were all mixed up together.
Okay, so here I'm defining the target words.
Notice that I have a space in front of each word, because that is like the natural tokenization for
these these language model tokenizers at least the OpenAI ones.
Okay.
So yeah here I'm just printing out the tokenization of each of these target words.
Most of them are formed from two tokens, and a couple of them come from three tokens.
Again, the idea which I justified in the previous video is that when you do analyses, when you want
to look at mechanistic interpretation, grab the activations for these multi target words Multi-token
target words.
What you do is look for the final token.
So we want to grab the activations.
We want to analyze the data.
Not for dough, not for ORC but for Nob.
And the reason which I explained in the previous video is that here when the model is processing space,
space do it doesn't know what's going to come next.
So it might think that this is supposed to be the verb to do.
And here we get orc.
So now the model thinks I don't know, maybe it thinks that this is like a misspelling of the word dork,
but by the time it gets to here, the model says, ah, I know what's going on here.
This is a doorknob.
So it's only when we get to the final token that the model really can incorporate all of this context
and understand what this entire word really corresponds to.
Okay, so then some tokenization.
I'm not going to talk about this stuff too much.
This note here is just a reminder that all of this code here is based on what I showed in the previous
video, that was this title.
I think that actually is plural there.
Okay, so yeah, looping over sentences over all the target words that makes this general.
So we can run this for any sentence with any ordering.
How many tokens is this particular target word.
And then we loop over starting from that length.
And then up until the end of the sequence.
The plus one is just for indexing.
Also this minus one is for indexing.
Indexing gets to be quite a headache in Python anyway.
Yeah.
So here if there is a match between the previous several tokens in the text with this target, and here
I just have to convert this into a PyTorch tensor just to use torch dot equal.
So if this is true, then we are at the final token of a little mini sequence where that sequence is
the target word that we're looking for.
So then we store the index.
So the location in the sequence of the final token for this target word and the target value.
And again yeah this is just some arbitrary numbers to go to store that.
You know toothpaste is the first target, toothbrush is the second target word and so on.
We will need this for a later exercise when we start doing some statistics.
And then here I'm printing out.
So we see that for example, sentence 20 has the target word dishwasher and it appears so then dishwasher
is target index four.
And this appears at index two of this sentence.
Okay.
And then just for a little bit of confirmation and sanity checking, what I'm doing here is printing
out the first sentence.
So let me see.
The first sentence is we have to go all the way back.
Oh sorry.
Sentence index one.
It's actually the second sentence.
I ran out of toothpaste this morning and I had to borrow some from my roommate.
What a weird sentence.
Anyway, so toothpaste is the 123, four fifth word.
But what we want to know is the index at which paste appears, because that is going to be the activations
that we want to analyze.
So what I'm doing is just printing out this.
So we see let's see toothpaste is here.
So we want to analyze this token.
So now for confirmation we can count this token 012345.
So that means we should see that index five in sentence one is the target index.
So now we go back up here sentence one index five.
And so that is correct.
So all of that was just a little sanity checking that this code works as expected okay.
Yeah.
And then here I'm just printing out the total number of appearances.
We get a nice balance.
So we have five appearances five sentences with each of the target words.
And that also means that there's a perfect balance of sample sizes between the dental hygiene words
and the furniture words.
Now, I'm happy to admit that the sample size is still fairly small.
Right?
So it's only 20 samples of data that we have.
If you're doing a real analysis for a real research project, you'd want to increase that number by
like two or maybe three orders of magnitude and also use lots of other categories and so on.
But yeah, for now this is pretty good.
Well, that previous exercise was quite involved, so I thought I would make this exercise be a little
bit easier.
Basically, the goal here is to have a matrix of activations to the final token for each target word
for each sentence.
So import GPT two large and hook all of the MLP projection neurons.
And that's what I'm highlighting over here.
You want this layer over here.
This is called C proj in the OpenAI GPT two format labeling.
And these are the contraction neurons that have the same dimensionality as the embeddings vectors.
So this is not the higher dimensional expansion neurons.
That would be these ones over here.
So see FC for fully connected.
So this is the contraction neurons or units that we will be analyzing in this code challenge.
And in fact the output of these neurons after passing through the non-linear activation function.
That's what gets added back onto the embeddings vectors in the residual stream.
But if you just hook into this layer, you'll get the activations before the jlu non-linearity.
Then you can push the batch of data so the text data through the model and confirm that you get all
of the activations and check the sizes.
The 40 here corresponds to 40 sentences, which is 20 sentences per category, and five appearances
of each of the four target words per category.
This number 20.
Here is the number of tokens per sentence, so per sequence including padding.
And of course the 1280 is the embedding dimension in the large version of this model.
The last thing to do for this exercise is to organize all of the activations for the final token from
each target word into a matrix, technically a tensor, because it's multi-dimensional.
So the idea is that all of these activations here are for all of the tokens in the sequence, but we
really just want the activations for the final token of each target word.
So the data matrix that we will use for the next several exercises will look like this.
Here I called it target x target activations and it is 36 by 40 by 1280 that corresponds to 36 layers
in the model.
So 36 transformer blocks that you see over here, 40 sentences and of course 1280 embeddings dimensions.
And that is the end result of exercise two.
When you get that data matrix, you will be ready to run some analyses and do some visualizations in
the next exercise.
But first, of course you need to create that matrix.
And that's what you should do now.
And now I will switch to code and show how I created that data matrix.
So here I'm importing the large version of GPT two.
And here I'm hooking the activations.
So looping over all of the layers I want to get for each of the transformer blocks.
So hidden layer the MLP and then C proj.
And then yeah here we can just extract the outputs.
And as per usual, I'm just detaching the numbers from all the gradient information, all the other
overhead that PyTorch provides so I can run that.
I think this is still import.
This will take another minute or so.
Okay.
And then I can run through all of the activations.
So push all the tokens through the model here I'm just going to print out the sizes.
And here is where I am creating the matrix of data.
So loop over all of these sentences.
Loop over all of the layers in the model that we have hooked.
And then I'm getting the activations from this layer, this sentence, and then the particular index
in that sequence that corresponds to the target, the final token in the target word.
Okay.
And then there's a lot to say there.
Uh, and then uh yeah I'm just converting them to numpy.
It's not strictly necessary, but uh, it will be just handy because it just makes the rest of the analyses
a little bit easier.
We can have everything in numpy format.
And now for some analyses in this exercise, you will run a t test on all the neurons to compare the
activations for the two categories.
You can create matrices to store the t values and p values that have a shape like this.
So 36 layers, 1280 dimensions or neurons.
And the value at each element in this matrix is the t statistic comparing the dental tokens to the furniture
tokens.
Now I recommend naming these variables something with the word data one in it, because later in this
code challenge, in a later exercise, we are going to confirm our findings using a separate data set
to see if those results that we get in the other data set are consistent with the results that we get
in this data set.
And that's because, yeah, there's always a risk of us overfitting.
And so we want to know whether the findings we get here really reflect something about category processing
in these MLP projection units.
Or if there's just something weird about these particular sentences that the t test latched onto anyway.
So call these variables data.
One you're going to have matrix for t values and a matrix for p values.
And yet later on we'll call the other data matrix data two.
So the point is you end up with lots of t values a matrix of t values.
There are many ways that you can visualize these t test results.
And this is a visualization that I came up with.
So here in this scatter plot you see layer on the x axis and the t value on the y axis, and all of
the neurons that have a statistically significant T value, which I defined as p less than 0.05.
Bonferroni corrected for multiple comparisons within each layer.
Those significant ones are labeled, they're plotted as circles, and the red X's correspond to non-significant
T values.
And over here, I'm plotting the percentage of neurons within each layer that have a significant T value.
Now the color of the dots and also the color of the bars over here correspond to the transformer layer.
And you can see that the category tuning is generally somewhere around 5 to 10% of the neurons per layer.
And it decreases as we get deeper into the model.
Now, that should not be so surprising considering that the later in the model we get so further into
the model, the less the activation actually has to do with the current token, and the more it has
to do with predicting what token should come next.
As I mentioned several times before, don't stress about reproducing the exact aesthetic features of
this plot.
If you get the analysis right and at least some basic visualization, then that's good enough.
And you can also copy this code from the solutions file and change it as you see fit.
You don't need to reinvent the wheel here, as long as you feel like you are making effort and learning
something, then I am happy and you should be as well.
Okay, so now you should pause the video and switch to code, run the analyses, make some beautiful
visualizations, and now I will switch to Python and discuss my solution and interpret the results a
bit more.
Once we have the data organized in this fashion with layers and sentences, and the first 20 is for
the dental category, and the second 20 set is for the furniture category.
And all of the neurons here.
Then running a T test is actually really straightforward.
Technically, you can do it in a double for loop over all the layers and over all of the neurons here,
but that's really not necessary.
With the Scipy.stats library, you can actually input matrices and the results or the function will
test all of the individual samples for you.
So all the individual tests, it will run that for you.
So therefore I provide two inputs here.
Let me separate them here by commas just to make sure that it's very clear what I'm doing here.
So I take from this target x activations matrix all of the layers, all of the neurons and only the
20 sentences that have label equals zero.
So these are the dental hygiene sentences.
And here it's all the same activations exactly the same.
But for the other set of 20 sentences, this input over here tells the t test function that I want to
do the comparison along the first dimension here.
So that's comparing all of the dental terms to all of the furniture category terms.
Okay.
If you would do something like this for example, then you're basically comparing the activation across
the different neurons.
It just doesn't make sense anyway.
So this is the right thing to do okay.
So now I get this variable t res from which I can extract the statistic that is the actual t values
and the p values themselves.
Here I'm just printing out the shape okay.
Here I'm defining a significance threshold.
So 0.05 I have discussed Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons earlier in the course.
But it's basically very straightforward.
We just divide by the total number of tests.
And now in these cases it's always there's always some ambiguity about how much you should be correcting
for because we also have 36 layers.
But I am considering that within each layer we are doing 1280 tests.
So I'm just dividing by 1280.
Although to be honest, once you have a sample size this big or sorry, a number of comparisons this
big, you know you can make this bigger and bigger and it doesn't really change that much for the p
value threshold, because the tails of the t distribution get really, really small really fast.
So there actually isn't a huge difference between a threshold corrected for 1000 comparisons versus
10,000 comparisons.
It's not that much difference.
Okay.
Anyway, uh, then I am.
Let me first create this plot and show you what this looks like, and then I'll discuss the code in
a little bit more detail.
So yeah, here is the scatter plot over the layers.
So I loop over the layers.
And then I'm going to figure out which of these neurons have a significant t value.
So a t value with a corresponding p value that is smaller than the Bonferroni corrected threshold.
And then I color those dots here I draw them.
And if the p values are larger than our significance threshold, then they get drawn as an x.
And that you see over here.
So first I find which of.
So yeah for this layer I'm looping over all of the layers.
Which of the p values for this layer are less than our significant threshold.
And then the ones that are significant.
Then I'm plotting those using circles with the plasma color map.
And yeah, then in the colormap I'm specifying layer divided by oops sorry about that.
Layer I.
So the layer index divided by the total number of layers.
So this is going to give me numbers between 0 and 1 or at least very close to one.
And that's what defines the color according to the plasma color map.
So that's if it is significant.
If it's not significant, then they all get plotted as red X's with a fairly small marker size.
And then up here I'm just storing the number of significant or the proportion of significant neurons
for this layer.
Okay.
So that gives me this plot.
And then here at the end I can make a bar plot over all the layers.
With the NUM significant, I suppose it would probably be more appropriate to call this the proportion
of significant results, but that's fine.
And then, yeah, using this same, uh, color map over here.
So there are a few interesting results to note about this.
First of all, it looks by very, you know, first pass visual inspection like there's some symmetry
here.
That is to say, it's not the case that the entire language model only prefers dental hygiene words.
And it doesn't care at all about furniture related words.
So we get lots of positive t values and negative t values.
And how do I know whether these positive t values correspond to more activation for dental words versus
for furniture words?
It's kind of arbitrary, but it's basically just how I inputted these data into the t test function.
So whichever variable you put in first that's going to be associated with a positive t value.
And then this is the comparison.
This would be associated with a negative t value.
Essentially the the the sorry the numerator of a t test is something like this.
It is I'll call it first input dot mean.
Minus the second input dot mean.
Obviously these are not real variable names, but it's this minus this that is the numerator of the
t statistic.
So therefore if you would swap these conditions inputted into the t test function, all the results
would be exactly the same.
The p values would be exactly the same, but the sign of the t test would be flipped.
Okay.
So it's a bit arbitrary.
You can do it either way, but you have to know which way you are putting, which order in which you
are inputting the labels so that the interpretation is correct.
I hope you are enjoying this code challenge so far.
We are now around halfway through and I'm going to break the video here.
In order to encourage you to take a break and refresh.
So when you're ready, come back to the video for the next installment of this code challenge.